#summary The annotations used by Objectify

= Example =
{{{
@Cach(expirationSeconds=600)
@Entity(name="Emp")
@Index // or @Unindex sets default for fields in class; if neither specified, default is @Unindex
class Employee {
   @Id long id;
   @Parent Key<Company> employer;

   @Unindex int vacationDays;

   // field value WILL be serialized (eg, with GWT) but will NOT be persisted in the datastore
   @Ignore int notPersistent;

   // field value will NOT be serialized (eg, with GWT) but WILL be persisted in the datastore
   transient int notSerialized;

   // field getting renamed
   @AlsoLoad("boss") Key<Employee> manager;

   String firstName;
   String lastName;

   // we used to store fullName, now we store first and last separately
   public void oldWay(@AlsoLoad("fullName") String fullName) {
       String[] split = fullName.split(" ");
       firstName = split[0];
       lastName = split[1];
   }

   static class Office {
      String building;
      String room;
   }

   // Allows you to query for employess in a building by filtering on "offices.building"
   @Embed Office[] offices;

   // Whatever gets put here will be serialized out and back (and cannot be filtered)
   @Seralize Object misc;

   @OnLoad void onLoad() { /* do something after load */ }
   @OnSave void onSave() { /* do something before persisting */ }
}
}}}

= The Annotations =

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Entity ==
  * Required for all registered entity classes.
  * Optionally specifies the name of a kind, ie {{{@Entity(name="Person")}}}

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Id ==
  * Must be placed on one and only one field of an @Entity class
  * Field must be type {{{Long}}}, {{{long}}}, or {{{String}}}
  * If used on type {{{Long}}}, null values will be autogenerated on put()

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Parent ==
  * Placed on at most one field of type {{{Key}}}
  * Defines the entity group parent for an entity

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.EntitySubclass ==
  * Placed on subclasses of polymorphic types
  * Exclusive with {{{@Entity}}}
  * One parent class must have {{{@Entity}}}
  * See [http://code.google.com/p/objectify-appengine/wiki/Entities#Polymorphism Polymorphism].

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Index ==
  * Placed on a field or class.
  * When placed on a class, sets the default state for all fields of the class.
  * Can take {{{If}}} conditions which allow partial indexing.
  * @Index state is inherited by embedded classes and their fields, but can be overriden with @Unindex.
  * Indexed fields cost more space and cpu time to store, but can be queried on.
  * Translates to {{{Entity.setProperty()}}} at the low-level api.
  * Unless otherwise specified, all classes default to @Unindex.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Unindex ==
  * Placed on a field or class.
  * When placed on a class, sets the default state for all fields of the class.
  * Can take {{{If}}} conditions which allow partial indexing.
  * @Unindex state is inherited by embedded classes and their fields, but can be overridden with @Index.
  * Unindexed fields consume less space and require less cpu time to store, but cannot be queried for.
  * Translates to {{{Entity.setUnindexedProperty()}}} at the low-level api.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Ignore ==
  * Placed on any field
  * Makes the field opaque to storage in the datastore; the field will be ignored for both read and write.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.IgnoreSave ==
  * Placed on any field
  * Field will be loaded from the datastore but won't be saved
  * Can take {{{If}}} conditions which allow some values to be saved and not others.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.IgnoreLoad ==
  * Placed on any field
  * Field will be saved to the datastore but will be ignored during load operations

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.AlsoLoad ==
  * Placed on a field or the single parameter to a method
  * Requires one value, the name of a property in the datastore to load into the field.
  * Example:  {{{@AlsoLoad("whatThisFieldUsedToBeCalled")}}}
  * Causes the field to be loaded from an alternate name in the underlying datastore
  * If placed on the parameter to a method that takes a single parameter, the method will be called with the datastore value
  * Can be used on multiple fields; they will all receive the loaded value.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Cache ==
  * Placed on an entity class
  * Stores entity data in a write-through cache for faster read performance
  * Allows you to specify the expiration of entities in the cache

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Embed ==
  * Placed on an entity field, or the field of any class embedded in an entity.
  * Field can be any custom type or a collection or array of your custom type.
  * See the [http://code.google.com/p/objectify-appengine/wiki/Entities#Embedding embedding] documentation.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Serialize ==
  * Placed on any entity field of Serializable type
  * Causes the object graph at that point to be stored as a serialized Blob.
  * Can be used on fields inside @Embed classes.
  * You can optionally configure zipping and compression level.
  * See the [http://code.google.com/p/objectify-appengine/wiki/Entities#Serializing serializing] documentation.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.OnLoad ==
  * Placed on any method that takes no parameters or a single parameter of type {{{Objectify}}}.
  * Called after the POJO is populated with data.
  * Can be specified on multiple methods in this class or any base class.
  * Methods are called in declared order, with superclass methods first.
  * See LifecycleCallbacks

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.OnSave ==
  * Placed on any method that takes no parameters or a single parameter of type {{{Objectify}}}.
  * Called before the POJO is written to the datastore Entity.
  * Can be specified on multiple methods in this class or any base class.
  * Methods are called in declared order, with superclass methods first.
  * See LifecycleCallbacks

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Load ==
  * Placed on entity fields of type {{{Ref<?>}}} or concrete entity reference
  * Causes the referenced entity to be loaded automatically
  * When placed on a {{{Ref<?>}}} field, allows load groups to be specified
  * Load groups cannot be specified on concrete entity references
  * See [http://code.google.com/p/objectify-appengine/wiki/Entities#Relationships Relationships]

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Mapify ==
  * TODO: This needs some explanation.
  * See the javadocs for details.

== @com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Translate ==
  * TODO: This needs some explanation.
  * See the javadocs for details.