#summary Objectify-Appengine Release Notes
#labels Featured

= 5.1.2 =
2014-11-27

  * Call superclass @OnSave methods before subclass @OnSave methods
  * Allow deferred save of entities with autogenerated ids.

= 5.1.1 =
2014-10-13

  * Fixed a problem with ObjectifyFilter re-entrancy that manifested when using `dispatch.forward()`.
    * Note that this means you will not be warned if you leak Objectify contexts via `ObjectifyService.begin()`

= 5.1 =
2014-10-09

  * Added `ofy().defer()` and `ofy().flush()`
  * An exception will be thrown if you try to use Objectify without the ObjectifyFilter
  * A new method for using Objectify outside of normal request handling (unit tests, remote api, etc)

If you are using Objectify outside of a normal GAE http request (eg, unit tests or the the remote api), there is a new method you must invoke. See javadocs for `ObjectifyService.run()`. The old ObjectifyFilter.complete() method has been removed.

= 5.0.5 =
2014-09-29

*IMPORTANT! Read the release notes for 5.0.*

 * Fixed distinct() projection queries

= 5.0.4 =
2014-09-23

*IMPORTANT! Read the release notes for 5.0.*

 * Fixed a problem with projection of numeric types
 * Added method `Key.toWebSafeString()`
 * Trim the condition in `Query.filterKey()`

= 5.0.3 =
2014-06-08

*IMPORTANT! Read the release notes for 5.0.*

  * Implemented projection queries.
  * Fixed issue with collections as the value of an embedded map.
  * Bumped versions of GAE SDK and Guava.

= 5.0.2 =
2014-04-20

*IMPORTANT! Read the release notes for 5.0.*

  * Fix bug preventing @Id/@Parent fields from being defined in non-@Entity base classes.

= 5.0.1 =
2014-04-20

*IMPORTANT! Read the release notes for 5.0.*

  * Fix bug causing "no registered subclass found" when embedded class field has an annotation.
  * Added Query.orderKey()
  * ofy().delete().entities() now accepts anything keylike, not just entity objects

= 5.0 =
2014-04-13
*IMPORTANT! Objectify v5 drops support for the old embedded object format.* If you use embedded objects, you must follow the UpgradeVersion4ToVersion5 instructions or you may lose data.

  * Translation engine has been completely rewritten.
  * @Embed annotation has been dropped; any nested classes are embedded.
  * Collections of embedded objects can be nested without restriction.
  * Embedded objects support polymorphism and lifecycle methods.
  * Method handles are used to populate properties (better performance).
  * Query supports composite filters.

Some annotations have changed; read UpgradeVersion4ToVersion5.

= 4.1.3 =
2014-04-12
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.8.3 or newer

  * Fix index contamination when batch saving multiple entities with nested indexes in the new format.

= 4.1.2 =
2014-04-05
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.8.3 or newer

  * Fix bug loading old embed format when an embedded list contains null nested embedded objects.

*IMPORTANT! Read the 4.1 release notes below*

= 4.1.1 =
2014-03-31
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.8.3 or newer

  * Fix bug loading new format when you have an @EmbedMap which contains EmbeddedEntity.
  * Fix bug loading new format when you have an array which contains EmbeddedEntity.

*IMPORTANT! Read the 4.1 release notes below*

= 4.1 =
2014-03-28
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.8.3 or newer

  * GWT source removed from jar and moved to separate project. Fixes compile problems with GAE SDK 1.9.1.
  * Changes the storage format of @Embed objects

*IMPORTANT! READ THIS!*

Objectify is changing the native format in which @Embed objects are stored. Instead of creating dot-separated property names, Objectify 4.1 can store objects using the new `EmbeddedEntity` native storage type. You are _strongly_ encouraged to migrate to this new storage type ASAP, because Objectify 5.0 will drop support for the old format entirely. The `EmbeddedEntity` format will allow many features that cannot be supported with the current codebase.

When loading entities Objectify 4.1 will automatically detect the format and read correctly. It defaults to writing the legacy format. If you call `ObjectifyFactory.setSaveWithNewEmbedFormat(true)`, Objectify will write with the new format. To convert your entire database, set this flag and load+save every entity which has an @Embed structure.

If you use the new storage format, you MUST NOT revert to a previous version of Objectify or you will *LOSE DATA*. However, you must migrate all data to the new format before Objectify 5.0.

This does not affect you if you do not use @Embed. If you have any questions, post them to the [http://groups.google.com/group/objectify-appengine Objectify Google Group].

= 4.0.1 =
2014-03-19
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.8.3 or newer

  * Map and List objects returned from Objectify can now be serialized.
  * Added ability to set explicit memcache error handler.
  * Added Query.reverse() method.
  * @EmbedMap now allows keys to be of type Key<?> in addition to String.
  * Anything can convert to Text, just like anything can convert to String.
  * Builds with JDK1.7.

= 4.0 =
2014-02-07
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.8.3 or newer

Since the first versions of Objectify, GAE's datastore API has expanded significantly with features (such as XG transactions and asynchrony) that fundamentally change how an API should work. Version 4 is a re-imagining of Objectify based on years of experience building GAE applications. The API and implementation have completely changed from Objectify v3; there's no way to produce a concise set of release notes. Please read all documentation from the beginning.

For v3 users, these two documents will help:

  * DesignObjectify4
  * UpgradeVersion3ToVersion4

Concise change notes will be maintained going forward.

= 3.1 =
2011-11-10
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.6.0 or newer
 
Please read the release notes for 3.1 beta 1.  In addition:

  * Always enables XG when starting a transaction on HRD
  * Memcache integration now uses SDK 1.6.0 batch CAS operations for efficiency
  * Added ObjectifyFactory.allocateIdRange()
  * Changed Key<?>.toWebSafeString() (introduced in 3.1b1) to getString()
  * Added a Key<?> constructor (and create() method) that takes a web safe string (ie getString())
  * Added optional converters for joda time and money classes
  * Added a varargs overload of Objectify.get(Key...)

= 3.1 beta 1 =
2011-10-13
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.5.5 or newer

*Note*:  The big change in 3.1 is that the memcache integration has been rewritten from scratch.  On the plus side, the new cache will not go out of sync with the datastore, even under severe contention.  On the down side, batch fetches are prohibitively slow.  This will be resolved in a future version by the addition of [http://code.google.com/p/googleappengine/issues/detail?id=4874 batch CAS operations] to the GAE SDK.

  * Added API for XG transactions
  * Completely rewritten cache code
  * Added Key<?>.toWebSafeString() and a constructor to reconstitute the Key<?>
  * Added ObjectifyFactory.allocateId() convenience method
  * Several internal API changes.

= 3.0.1 =
2011-09-08
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.4.0 or newer

  * Added methods Query.chunkSize() and Query.prefetchSize()
  * Experimental support for @Embedded Maps
  * Added a TimeZoneConverter so you can have TimeZone fields
  * Added a BigDecimalLongConverter which is not enabled by default

= 3.0 =
2011-04-22
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.4.0 or newer

  IMPORTANT!  Read the release notes for beta1 and beta2, in particular the note about breaking Key<?> serialization.  If you have *serialized* Key<?> objects into persistent stores, this will affect you.  Also, you will not be able to construct Key<?> objects from client-side GWT.

  * Fixed NPE when fetching polymorphic entities not in the database.
  * Fixed NPE when fetching collection field with raw type (missing generics).

= 3.0 beta 2=
2011-04-04
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.4.0 or newer

  * Implemented Polymorphic persistence
  * Key<?> implementation changed - this WILL BREAK KEY SERIALIZATION.  If you have serialized keys in a persistent structure, read the discussion of this issue on the mailing list.  This only affects Key<?> in @Serialized fields; simple Key<?> properties and @Embedded Key<?>s are fine.
  * Fields now receive their @Indexed/@Unindexed default state from the class they are declared on rather than the final class in the inheritance hierarchy.  This is a potential breaking change, although previous behavior was undocumented.
  * Added a Query.fetch() method to produce an async Iterable
  * Better error message if you try to register a nonstatic inner class
  * Loading embedded collections with a null value for the property itself no longer throws an exception.
  * Added IfEmpty and IfNotEmpty conditions
  * A number of internal APIs changed to support polymorphism.

= 3.0 beta 1 =
2011-02-28
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.4.0 or newer

  * Implemented asynchronous operations on {{{AsyncObjectify}}}
  * *Breaking change*: Moved all classes in {{{com.googlecode.objectify.helper}}} to {{{com.googlecode.objectify.util}}}, including {{{DAOBase}}}
  * Significant internal changes to support async API.

= 2.2.3 =
2010-12-13
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.4.0 or newer

  * Added pluggable system for managing type conversions
  * Unwraps InvocationTargetExceptions in lifecycle callbacks
  * Made ObjectifyOpts.clone() public
  * Fixed bug when filtering by enums
  * Added a "Monotonic" helper class

= 2.2.2 =
2010-10-21
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.8 or newer

  * Deprecated Query.countAll(), added Query.count() method which behaves better.
  * Deprecated Query.cursor(); added Query.startCursor() and Query.endCursor().
  * Added Query.clone()
  * Allows null @Parent keys.
  * Now handles java.sql.Date
  * Ignores synthetic fields (should make Groovy happier)
  * Now respects @Indexed/@Unindexed on entity base classes.
  * Added overrideable createDefaultOpts() method to ObjectifyFactory. Added clone() method to ObjectifyOpts.
  * @Id and @Parent fields are now included when you embed an entity in another entity.
  * Fixed a bug related to fields whose type base class name overlapped with entity names (eg, User)

= 2.2.1 =
2010-06-01
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.2 or newer

  * Added typesafe ObjectifyFactory.allocateIds() methods.
  * Enums are persisted using the .name() method rather than .toString()
  * Added varargs versions of Objectify.put() and Objectify.get()
  * DAOBase now lets you use ObjectifyOpts

= 2.2 =
2010-04-22
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.2 or newer

  * Added ObjectifyOpts parameter to begin()
  * Added optional session cache
  * Fixed automatic byte[] to Blob conversion
  * Added Query.list() and Query.listKeys() methods
  * Fixed filtering with IN operator on key and id columns
  * Lifecycle callbacks (@PostLoad and @PrePersist) can now take Objectify and/or Entity parameters
  * Removed the datastore retry mechanism - this is now built into the appengine SDK.

= 2.1 =
2010-03-25
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.1 or newer

  * Changed return type of {{{Objectify.get(Class<? extends T> clazz, Iterable<S> idsOrNames)}}} to {{{Map<S, T>}}} rather than {{{Map<Key<T>, T>}}}.  *This is a breaking change*
  * Added support for partial index conditions to @Indexed and @Unindexed
  * Added @NotSaved (with conditions)
  * Added @AlsoLoad as replacement for @OldName
  * Deprecated @OldName
  * Added {{{Objectify.getFactory()}}} method
  * Added wrapper helper classes for Objectify, Query, and QueryResultIterator

= 2.0.2 =
2010-02-25
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.1 or newer

  * Added @Unindexed and @Indexed class and field support
  * Fixed bugs in query Cursor and limit() support.

= 2.0.1 =
2010-02-18
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.1 or newer

  * Added Cursor support
  * Added @PostLoad and @PrePersist callbacks

= 2.0 =
2010-02-10
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.0 or newer

  * See 2.0rc1 and 2.0b1 release notes for significant changes since 1.0.3.
  * Changed ObjectifyFactory.createKey() to slightly-different ObjectifyFactory.getKey() and removed createKey() from ObjectifyService.

= 2.0 rc 1 =
2010-02-09
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.0 or newer

  * Adds memcache integration (write-through, transaction safe, negative caching, custom class expiration) with a @Cached annotation.

= 2.0 beta 1 =
2010-02-07
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.0 or newer

  * Completely new Query API.
  * OKey<?> has been renamed to Key<?>
  * Added @Embedded classes, collections, and arrays
  * Added GWT versions of all basic datastore types (Email, Link, GeoPt, etc)
  * Fields using the `transient` keyword *will* now be persisted. The `@Transient` annotation is now the only way to tell Objectify to ignore a field.
  * New architecture and many more unit tests!

= 1.0.3 =
2010-01-29
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.0 or newer

  * Fixed a bug in batch delete.

= 1.0.2 =
2010-01-26
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.0 or newer

  * Entity superclasses now processed correctly.
  * OKey now serializes properly in GWT.
  * Fixed classloader exception when using FetchOptions with datastore retries.
  * Better error msg if entity missing no-args constructor.

= 1.0.1 =
2010-01-22
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.0 or newer

  * Added support for Enum types
  * Fixed OPreparedQuery.asSingle() when resultset was empty
  * Added full support for the common collection types

= 1.0 =
2010-01-13
  * Requires Appengine SDK 1.3.0 or newer

  * Initial release. 