#summary Setting up Objectify in a project

<wiki:toc max_depth="1" />

= Add {{{objectify.jar}}} to your project =

Add {{{objectify-N.N.N.jar}}} to your project's WEB-INF/lib directory.  There are no other jar dependencies.

If you use Maven, see the MavenRepository.

= Enable {{{ObjectifyFilter}}} for your requests =

Objectify requires a filter to clean up any thread-local transaction contexts and pending asynchronous operations that remain at the end of a request.  Add this to your WEB-INF/web.xml:

{{{
<filter>
	<filter-name>ObjectifyFilter</filter-name>
	<filter-class>com.googlecode.objectify.ObjectifyFilter</filter-class>
</filter>
<filter-mapping>
	<filter-name>ObjectifyFilter</filter-name>
	<url-pattern>/*</url-pattern>
</filter-mapping>
}}}

== Guice Alternative ==

If you use Guice, you don't use web.xml to define filters.  Add this to your servlet module:

{{{
filter("/*").through(ObjectifyFilter.class);
}}}

...and this to your business module:

{{{
bind(ObjectifyFilter.class).in(Singleton.class);
}}}

= Enable static imports in Eclipse =

This step is optional, but will help prevent you from typing {{{ObjectifyService.ofy()}}} over and over again.

Eclipse does not automatically add static imports when you Organize Imports.  By default, it won't even complete static imports when you type _{{{ofy}}}[cmd-space]_.  If you want to save yourself a lot of typing, add a "Favorite" static import for {{{ObjectifyService.ofy()}}}.

Visit *Window » Preferences » Java » Editor » Content Assist » Favorites* and add:

{{{
com.googlecode.objectify.ObjectifyService.ofy
}}}

Now, when you type _{{{ofy}}}[cmd-space]_, Eclipse will add a static import for you.

More details can be found in [http://stackoverflow.com/questions/288861/eclipse-optimize-imports-to-include-static-imports this stackoverflow question].

= Building Objectify From Source =

If you would like to build Objectify from source, see ContributingToObjectify.