#summary How To Upgrade Objectify v3 To v4

= Upgrading =

Objectify v4 is a major departure from v3 with very significant, non-backwards-compatible API changes.  This guide should help you convert a v3 project to the new API.  Before upgrading, you may find it helpful to read the DesignObjectify4 for a general overview of what changed and why.

*Note:* If you have any problems upgrading, post to the [http://groups.google.com/group/objectify-appengine Objectify Google Group].  We will update this document.

See [https://github.com/stickfigure/motomapia Motomapia] for a real-world example.

The steps:

== Replace the Objectify3 jar with the Objectify4 jar ==

Be absolutely certain that the Objectify3 jar is no longer on your classpath. Also make sure the Google guava jar is available.

== Completely remove JDO & JPA ==

Objectify v4 no longer uses _any_ JPA annotations.  However, several of the new annotations have identical names but different packages (eg, {{{javax.persistence.Entity}}} -> {{{com.googlecode.objectify.annotation.Entity}}}).  By removing the JPA annotations from your classpath, your IDE will highlight all the (now invalid) references to old annotations.

This step is critical; if you have a large project, it will be almost impossible to hunt down the annotation changes individually.  Let the IDE help.

In Eclipse, visit Project Properties -> Google -> App Engine and *uncheck* "Use Datanucleus JDO/JPA to access the datastore".

If you use Maven, or manually maintain your jars, ensure that the file {{{geronimo-jpa_3.0_spec-1.1.1.jar}}} is not included in your project.  Note that the actual version numbers on this file may change; there should be no JPA-related jars in your project!

== Add @Entity ==

v3 recommended, but did not require the {{{@Entity}}} annotation on entities.  You only had to register them.

v4 requires the {{{@Entity}}} annotation on all classes which will be registered as entities.

== Update annotations ==

Eclipse should now highlight all the problem annotations in your project.  See DesignObjectify4 for a mapping of old-to-new annotations.

=== Add indexes ===

Objectify3 indexed all properties by default. Objectify4 inverts this; all properties are *NOT* indexed by default. You must specify {{{@Index}}} on all fields you want indexed. You can place this annotation on the class to index all properties by default; use {{{@Unindex}}} on fields to stop indexing them.

== Add {{{ObjectifyFilter}}} ==

v4 requires a servlet filter on requests that use Objectify.  See [Setup].

If you have {{{AsyncCacheFilter}}} configured, you should remove it.  {{{ObjectifyFilter}}} includes this behavior.

== Use {{{ofy()}}} ==

In v3, you would typically inject or pass around instances of {{{Objectify}}}.  In v4, this is discouraged.  You should always use the static {{{ofy()}}} method whenever you use Objectify; this will prevent accidentally using the wrong transaction context.

Read BasicOperations.

== Objectify API has changed ==

Really do read BasicOperations and DesignObjectify4.  Instead of get()/put()/delete()/query(), Objectify v4 has a fluent, command-oriented API.  There is no longer an {{{ObjectifyOpts}}}; you can now easily configure options on a per-command basis.

== Query objects are now immutable ==

This will require looking at your code carefully.  In v3, Query objects were mutable and allowed configuration like this:

{{{
Query<Thing> q = ...create query object
q.filter("foo", foo);
q.limit(10);
}}}

*THIS WILL NO LONGER WORK!*

Objectify v4 query objects are immutable, and therefore must be assigned like this:

{{{
Query<Thing> q = ...create query object
q = q.filter("foo", foo);
q = q.limit(10);

// More likely, you will do this:
Query<Thing> q = ofy().load().type(Thing.class).filter("foo", foo).limit(10);
}}}

== New transaction syntax ==

Objectify v3 transaction syntax is pretty much exactly the same pattern you use for the low-level API or JDO:

{{{
Objectify ofy = ObjectifyService.beginTransaction();
try
{
    ClubMembers cm = ofy.get(ClubMembers.class, "k123");
    cm.incrementByOne();
    ofy.put(cm);

    ofy.getTxn().commit();
}
finally
{
    if (ofy.getTxn().isActive())
        ofy.getTxn().rollback();
}
}}}

UGLY!  Objectify v4 has a much more concise syntax for [Transactions]:

{{{
ofy().transact(new VoidWork() {
    public void vrun() {
        ClubMembers cm = ofy().load().type(ClubMembers.class).id("k123").now()
        cm.incrementByOne();
        ofy().save().entity(cm);
    }
});
}}}

Note that Ofy4 transactions are retried on optimistic concurrency failure ({{{ConcurrentModificationException}}} and therefore *must be idempotent*.  If your transaction code is not idempotent (a bad idea), you can limit retry behavior by using {{{transactNew(1, work)}}}.

Also note that the {{{Objectify}}} returned by {{{ofy()}}} will be a different instance inside and outside the transaction.

Please read [Transactions] carefully, especially the section WRT transaction inheritance.  This is one of the most powerful features of Objectify4, and provides almost EJB-like transaction semantics.

== Wrappers ==

Objectify used to provide Wrapper classes (ObjectifyWrapper, LoaderWrapper, etc) which provided a very complicated mechanism for adding your own behavior. These have been removed; instead simply extend ObjectifyImpl, LoaderImpl, etc directly and add/override the behavior you want. This is much simpler.